rfc: add error handling (#211)
pingcap/dm: docs/RFCS/20190722_error_handling.md

# Proposal: Improve Error System

- Author(s):    [yangfei](https://github.com/amyangfei)
- Last updated: 2019-07-22

## Abstract

> This proposal introduce an error code mechanism in the DM error system, making a regulation for error handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces an error code mechanism in the DM error system, making a regulation for error handling.
```

- If the error information returned from the inner function is enough for the current function to describe the error scenario, then it returns `errors.Trace(err)` or `err` directly to the upper code stack.
- If more error information is required for the current function, such as more detail descriptions, some variable values from the current code stack, then it `Annotate`s the error returned from the inner function or even changes fields such as `ErrClass`, `ErrLevel`, etc. Take the following code snippet as an example, the checkpoint `FlushPointsExcept` returns an error, and then in Syncer’s code stack, it annotates the returned error with more information.

```go
func (s *Syncer) flushCheckPoints() error {
	err := s.checkpoint.FlushPointsExcept(...)
	if err != nil {
		return Annotatef(err, "flush checkpoint %s", s.checkpoint)
	}
}
```

> - In the following code logic, the `txn.Exec` encounters error `err1`, and we try to roll back the transaction but unfortunately the `txn.Rollback` gets another error `err2`. In this scenario, `err1` is more essential than err2. We are considering adding a secondary error in the error instance, but not in the current version. We should carefully use error in this scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the following code logic, the `txn.Exec` encounters error `err1`, and we try to roll back the transaction but unfortunately the `txn.Rollback` gets another error `err2`. In this scenario, `err1` is more essential than err2. We are considering adding a secondary error in the error instance, but not in the current version. We should use errors carefully in this scenario.
```

# Proposal: Improve Error System

- Author(s):    [yangfei](https://github.com/amyangfei)
- Last updated: 2019-07-22

## Abstract

> This proposal proposes to introduce the error code mechanism in DM error system and make a regulation for error handling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal proposes to introduce the error code mechanism in DM and make a regulation for error handling.
```

Table of contents:

- [Background](#Background)
- [Implementation](#Implementation)
    - [Error scenario classification and error codes](#Error-scenario-classification-and-error-codes)
        - [Error object definition](#Error-object-definition)
        - [Error classification and error codes](#Error-classification-and-error-codes)
    - [Goal of error handling](#Goal-of-error-handling)
        - [Provide better error equivalences check](#Provide-better-error-equivalences-check)
        - [Enhance the error chain](#Enhance-the-error-chain)
        - [Embedded stack traces](#Embedded-stack-traces)
        - [Error output specification](#Error-output-specification)
    - [Error handling regulation](#Error-handling-regulation)
        - [API list](#API-list)

## Background

> Currently all DM errors are constructed by `errors.Errorf` with error description or `errors.Annotatef` with description and annotated error. Description oriented error is easy for users to understand, however when users report error to developer or DBA, they have to give the full description of the error, which is often a long text with some embed programming objects. On the other side, if users want to find some specific error, they have to grep some keywords or even a long text from the log. From the developers’ perspective, we need a better way to distinguish specific error rather than matching error relying on the presence of a substring in the error message. Based on the above considerations, it is highly demanded to design a new error system, which will provide better error classification, more useful embedded information and better error equivalences check. This proposal will focus on the following points:

Reviewer: > , they have to grep some keywords
What does grep means

> Currently all DM errors are constructed by `errors.Errorf` with error description or `errors.Annotatef` with description and annotated error. Description oriented error is easy for users to understand, however when users report error to developer or DBA, they have to give the full description of the error, which is often a long text with some embed programming objects. On the other side, if users want to find some specific error, they have to grep some keywords or even a long text from the log. From the developers’ perspective, we need a better way to distinguish specific error rather than matching error relying on the presence of a substring in the error message. Based on the above considerations, it is highly demanded to design a new error system, which will provide better error classification, more useful embedded information and better error equivalences check. This proposal will focus on the following points:

Author: grep is a command-line utility for searching plain-text data sets for lines that match a regular expression. It is used here as a short for search words from by some tools, such as grep, etc.

- Organize DM error scenarios and classify these errors
- Provide a unified error code mechanism

> - Standardize error handling, including how to create,  propagate and log an error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Standardize error handling, including how to create, propagate and log an error
```

### Goal of error handling

#### Provide better error equivalences check

1. Enable fast, reliable and secure determination of whether a particular error cause is present（no relying on the presence of a substring in the error messages）
2. Provide the following interface for error equivalences check.
3. Support protobuf-encodable error object，so we can work with errors transmitted across the network via GRPC.（TODO）

```go
// Equal returns true iff the error contains `reference` in any of its
func (e *Error) Equal(reference error) bool {}

// EqualAny is like Equal() but supports multiple reference errors.
func (e terror) EqualAny(references ...error) bool {}
```

#### Enhance the error chain

1. When we generate a new error in DM level source, we always use `Generate` or `Generatef` to create a new Error instance from a defined error list.
2. When we invoke a third party function and get an error, we should change this error to adapt our error system, we have two choices here:

- Keep the error message from third party function and create a related Error instance in new error system.
- Create a new Error instance, and save the third party error in its `rawCause` field.

> 1. Supposing one function A invokes another function B, and function A is also invoked by other code, both functions A and function B are DM level code and have an error field in their return values, we should make a rule about how to propagate error to upper code. In this scenario, we call function A as current function, we call function B as inner function, and we call the code invokes function A as upper code stack. The inner function returns `err != nil`, the current function shall propagate this error to the upper code stack, it will generate different error object based on the code logic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Supposing one function A invokes another function B, and function A is also invoked by other code, both functions A and function B are DM level code and have an error field in their return values, we should make a rule about how to propagate error to upper code. In this scenario, we call function A as current function, we call function B as inner function, and we call the code invokes function A as upper code stack. The inner function returns `err != nil`, the current function shall propagate this error to the upper code stack, it will generate different error object based on the code logic.
```

```go
err1 := txn.Exec(sql, args...)
if err != nil {
	err2 := txn.Rollback()
	if err2 != nil {
		log.Errorf("rollback error: %v", err2)
	}
	// should return the exec err1, instead of the rollback err2.
	return errors.Trace(err1)
}
```

as for error combination requirements, we provide the following APIs.

```go
// Annotate adds a message and ensures there is a stack trace
func Annotate(err error, message string) error {}

// Annotatef adds a message and ensures there is a stack trace
func Annotatef(err error, format string, args ...interface{}) error {}

// Delegate creates a new *Error with the same fields of the give *Error,
// except for new arguments, it also sets the err as raw cause of *Error
func (e *Error) Delegate(err error, args ...interface{}) error {}
```

> Difference between `error Annotate` and `error Delegate`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Differences between `error Annotate` and `error Delegate`
```

> - The Annotate way asserts the error to an `*Error` instance and adds additional error message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Annotate way asserts the error to an `*Error` instance and adds an additional error message.
```

> - The Delegate way creates a new `*Error` instance from given `*Error`, and set the given error to its `rawCause` field. The error in the parameter is often returned from third party function and we store it to use it later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Delegate way creates a new `*Error` instance from the given `*Error`, and sets the given error to its `rawCause` field. The error in the parameter is often returned from a third party function and we store it for using later.
```

#### Embedded stack traces

> We use [pingcap/errors/StackTracer](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://github.com/pingcap/errors/blob/master/stack.go%23L13-L17&sa=D&ust=1563783859473000) to record stack trace, we should ensure to add stack trace information each time when we create a new Error instance. Besides we should keep the stack trace in function call back tracing. Let’s see how each way keeps the stack trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use [pingcap/errors/StackTracer](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://github.com/pingcap/errors/blob/master/stack.go%23L13-L17&sa=D&ust=1563783859473000) to record the stack trace, and ensures that stack trace information is added each time when we create a new Error instance. In addition, we should keep the stack trace in the backtracing of the function call. Let’s see how each way keeps the stack trace.
```

> - First time create an `*Error`: `Generate`, `Generatef` or `Delegate` will automaticity add the stack trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Create an `*Error` for the first time: `Generate`, `Generatef` or `Delegate` automaticity adds the stack trace
```

> - Get an `*Error` from DM function, `return err` directly: the stack trace will be kept in *Error instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get an `*Error` from the DM function, `return err` directly: the stack trace is kept in the *Error instance.
```

> - Get an `*Error` from DM function, use `Annotate` or `Annotatef` to change some fields of the `*Error`: we still use the original `*Error` instance, only change fields excluding `code` and `stack`, so the stack trace is kept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get an `*Error` from the DM function, use `Annotate` or `Annotatef` to change some fields of the `*Error`: we still use the original `*Error` instance, and only change fields excluding `code` and `stack`, so the stack trace is kept.
```
